[Music]
welcome to today's episode of deep
transformation self-society spirit
i'm roger walsh and our co-host is the
uh distinguished john dupuis
and uh guest today is the truly
remarkable
chris bash who is a
internationally known professor of
philosophy and religious studies
an author an award-winning teacher and
an internationally known speaker
usually in these dialogues john knight
tries to stay in the background but the
topic of today is so remarkable the
experience is described so
literally out of this world
that i want to just give a take a moment
to give a context for the discussion
compared to the world's
many cultures western culture is unusual
in a variety of ways
in fact researchers have recently
described this as weird
w-i-e-r-d
western industrialized educated
rich and democratic
and so much research has been done on
westerners that it was assumed that our
characteristics were
pretty much common to the world's
cultures but now we're beginning to see
that
that's not true
and that other cultures have their own
richnesses and gifts in a wide variety
one very important distinction between
traditional western culture and
most of the world's cultures is in their
attitude and use of older states of
consciousness
the anthropologist erica brujanon
discovered in her world
world survey that over 90 of the world's
cultures have institutionalized altered
states of consciousness
meaning that they use a variety of
practices to induce
specific states of consciousness and
then mine them for the information and
wisdom
they use and look they and venerate
uh states such as dreams
uh hypnosis
uh trance of various kind
and
states induced by meditation
contemplation yoga
asceticism a wide variety in these
cultures anthropologists now called poly
polyphasic
meaning that they draw their
understanding of reality from many
phases of consciousness
by contrast western culture is pretty
unique
in having been until very recently a
monophasic culture
in that we draw our understanding of
ourselves and the world almost entirely
from the usual waking state
and kind of look down on other states as
inferior or
deluded or distorted in various ways
but that's begun to change and it began
to change in the 60s of course with an
introduction of psychedelics to the
culture which was soon followed by an
influx of asian practices meditation
yoga
contemplations
and after that by the rediscovery and
rebirth of western contemplative
practices
so that now
we have in the west a
wide variety of practices reducing
ordered states and the west is
undergoing a dramatic and very important
but often unrecognized transformation
from a monophaser culture to a polyphase
of culture one in which we are now
beginning to appreciate and research and
draw our understanding of ourselves and
reality from multiple states of
consciousness
one of the most potent and remarkable
ways of inducing order states is with
psychedelics that's what started our own
western cultures transformation and it's
now the subject of a
lot of uh
solid research
at places like uh one of the leaders is
john hopkins university
where scientists and re and clinical
clinicians are discovering
that psychedelics have just as the
original research in the 60s and 70s
found
a wide variety of therapeutic
applications
and
perhaps most surprising
very profound spiritual applications
the capacity for inducing profound
openings
to
[Music]
radically older states in which
which profound vistas and understandings
of ourselves and realities become
available that of course is not new to
the rest of the world but issue is new
to western research
and the findings are quite remarkable so
we're very fortunate in having with us a
man who has devoted his life to the
research of these curious chemicals
and has done it both through academic
research and comparative cultural
analysis
but also through a remarkably intense
long-lasting
carefully
analyzed and documented systematic
exploration of the use of these
chemicals themselves
his experiences are
nothing less than
extraordinary and have
far far reaching implications for our
understanding
of the fundamental nature of reality in
ourselves
he did this in a as a systematic
investigation
into the fundamental nature
of reality
and he was able to
reflect on his first hand observations
with the eye of a trained
researcher philosopher theologian
and then he pulled together
cross-cultural historical
and religious evidence
to
bring to bear on his own investigations
that so these are some of the remarkable
things our guest chris space has
explored i mentioned that he was a
prolific author and his books include
dark knight early dawn
subtitle steps to a deep ecology of mind
he's also taught about and written about
education and is an award-winning
educator himself and his book is titled
the living classroom
and most recently he wrote the
literally mind-boggling book lsd in the
mind of the universe in which he
detailed his exploration
of psychedelics and the insights they
opened for him
so that's a long introduction but it
felt
important to give a context for these
very remarkable experiences
that chris will be
gifting us with in sharing his his
insights over the many years of deep
systematic exploration
i've just spent the weekend going back
to the book i read it a couple of years
ago in manuscript form and was impressed
enough to write a review for it
and i've been spending the weekend with
it and once again i
feel like i've had my
worldview expanded multiple times and my
understanding of myself and reality
challenged multiple times all in very
valuable ways
so chris that's a long introduction but
it's truly a delight and an honor to be
with you today
and
thank you so much for being with us
thank you roger it's a very warm
introduction and i'm just delighted to
be here with you and john today it's a
pleasure well there are many places we
can we can go with this and hopefully we
will but roger allow me to to give my
little two sets please yes last week
roger asked me would you like to have
christopher bash on i was like
seriously yes
and uh i had one week or less than a
week
so immediately i order the book
and uh i got the audio version thank god
and that's what that's kept me through
the weekend
but i just want to put out there your
book dark knight early dawn
was
one of the more important books
for me personally that i've ever read
so when your name came up again the
possibility to have this
conversation and i'll i'll tell you what
i
i can't remember all the specifics but
after 20 years it's been a while
uh when i first read it
i had a
stabilized understanding
of nonduality
based on my
explorations and journeyings and vision
questing and and fasting and prayers and
meditation and all that and i i kind of
got it but the way you expressed it
something in that book just consolated
it and it has been accessible to me in a
stable
uh form ever since then so
that's that's a tremendous gift so this
uh
this book that i i've been listening to
is unlike
uh
anything that i've
experienced and it is
either you're absolutely sane
or you're completely insane
i uh
my experiences along these lines
um
[Music]
says this really stinks of deep truth
and um also the the very human the very
humble way that you present
and self-revelatory what's going on in
your personal life and how you did it
and everything is is uh
somebody with an open mind i think is is
just ends up trusting you
uh just i'm in the hands of somebody i
can listen to and then from there it
goes on to um
it's very big this may be
a
a bringing together of everything we've
been working on in our generation
but
in a new
holistic religious scientific
everything vision
that
that transforms us from a reality where
a lot of us are killing ourselves or
live in deep depression
to
[Music]
an absolutely
a thousand percent changed view of
reality and i'm not using that as
hyperbole at least i'm not trying to
it's that big it's that radical uh it's
that um
that pay attention to this
thank you
your description john touches me very
deeply and it really touches me that
something i've written has influenced
your experience of non-duality that just
really touches me thank you
beautiful yeah
uh
chris
you know
of course
i i think everyone will want to know
what motivated you to begin this
extraordinary question maybe you can
just say say a little bit about what the
nature of what you actually did
and to induce these remarkable
experiences and and what motivated you
to begin
well
all my life i've had a just a deep
passion to understand our universe i
mean i was in the seminary starting in
high school training to be a catholic
priest left that
went on to get a degree in theology from
notre dame and then cambridge and brown
i finished brown
in philosophy of religion
but an absolute convinced agnostic with
strong atheistic inclinations but the
passion to understand what's real why is
there so much suffering in the world is
there an intelligence in existence
was still there still pushing me in all
of my studies
now i had finished my dissertation i was
looking for where to go next and i
encountered stan groff's book realms of
the human unconscious
that extraordinary book that just turned
my life around and one reading
he convinced me that
lsd or psychedelics could be used safely
if you use them in a with proper
precautions to explore the deep
structure of one's consciousness and
some of his anecdotes also indicated
more than one's own personal unconscious
that one could reach out deeper to
explore
deeper fabric of consciousness and i
quickly realized the philosophical
significance not just psychological
significance of his work
so
i realized that people in my profession
philosophy of religion my discipline
would soon the ones making the most
important contribution to the field
would be people writing out of an
experiential basis not just an
intellectual basis
to do that you have to have not just a
few experiences but you have to undergo
systematic training in the discipline so
that's what i did it was
1979 when i began what became a 20-year
journey
i worked for four years i stopped for
six years for reasons that i give in the
book and then i resumed for 10 years but
overall over 20 years i did 73 high dose
lsd sessions following stan's protocol
this is a regimen that i wouldn't
recommend i really don't recommend today
with hindsight i realized that i really
pushed myself harder
than was sometimes wise
but i used a lot of precautions i took
did all of the
classic training for
uh and precautions for
doing fully internalized sessions with a
sitter my sitter was a clinical
psychologist whom i was married to at
the time carol
and
using very carefully selected evocative
music basically
and let me mention i i worked with high
doses of lsd
initially because
i was still thinking in terms of a model
of individual awakening or individual
healing
and i i was thinking i knew that karma
according to the eastern models it was
finite karma
and basically i wanted to accelerate my
own spiritual development and i thought
that if i could uh sustain the intensity
of the confrontation i could basically
bite off bigger bites of karma in each
session if i worked with high doses
rather than melted more slowly with low
doses and it was simply a matter of
efficiency i did it was hard to hit time
for these sessions in a dual career
marriage and i just thought i would work
a little harder more aggressively
and i turned out that was a based on a
completely false set of assumptions
i found that in my work
within a few years i was entering into
domains that were far far beyond
anything that made sense in terms of an
individual model
of transformation i began to understand
that my sessions had been had catalyzed
something
that was aimed at nothing less than some
type of healing or transformation of the
human species as a whole
so working with very very high doses
since since existence is unified from
the very start
working with high doses that hyper
amplifies consciousness
activates
it only it changes not only how deep you
go
but it changes how wide you are when you
go there so it activates a larger field
of consciousness which then triggers the
the cycles of death and rebirth that
workings with psychedelics
therapeutically does
so i did this for 20 years
and i finished in 1999
and then i digested those experiences
for another 20 years this is a very
challenging undertaking it took a long
time
to connect all the dots and to absorb
them and
it took me five years to write the book
uh
yeah
it's a lot
i was thinking i would be much more
comfortable writing this book
posthumously
holding it and releasing it posthumously
because it is so
exposing in the sense of your most
intimate relationship with the divine
but the mother told me no there's no
time for that kind of indulgence
uh
the word it was needed and it would mesh
it would support other people in their
work and our times that we're going into
historically
we all hands on deck
you know all hands on deck needed to
come forward now
beautiful and
and
it really does feel that this
work you did and really was work
of exploration with these psychedelics
and the writing of the book really is
was done out of a very large
motive and
and as you said it was it was work i i
was struck by just the you know our
culture has this
very naive
media view of psychedelics as being done
for you know getting high and having a
good time and yes that can happen
but
and you had some extraordinary ecstatic
experiences but you also went through
the hell realms not once but multiple
times and as you describe
having to
[Music]
open to levels of not only your own
suffering but collective suffering the
history of human
cruelty etc etc i mean this was
extraordinary i just found myself bowing
to the courage you had to bring to this
time after time after time and
yet you
always seemed to find
that ultimately there was a value in the
suffering
i wonder if you could say
what kept you going and what kind of
value found there
well this was the great gift that stan
gave me in his work he taught me to
trust the process
and that was affirmed in my own
experience and my experience was if you
completely trust the process and let
your session take you where it wants to
take you
it may get worse and worse you may enter
experiences that are completely
inscrutable that completely horrifying
you don't understand why you're going
here or what sense it makes but if you
surrender to it completely this will
come eventually to a culmination and
you'll be taken through a death rebirth
cycle you some part of you will die will
slough off you'll be taken into a
transition
and through this transition you will
awaken in a different reality into a
different level of reality
and for the remainder of that session
you will experience teaching or
experiences within a completely ecstatic
framework so there is the purification
side of the session and the ecstatic
side of the session
so what you internalize
at the end of the day
is not just the suffering but the entire
cycle that suffering reaches a peak
there is a combination there is a
breakthrough and then there is joy and
ecstasy and communion and then
integration at the end
it's the balance of the joy
and the ecstasy of insight
with the purification process
that makes it manageable like if i had
to go through all the suffering for
years without that ecstatic teaching
i would not have been able to do it as
it was it it was difficult when i was
going through the ocean of suffering
which
was in the third and fourth years of the
work fifth fifth year of the work
the morning of the session was difficult
because i had a sense of what i was
getting into and where it was going i'd
but i don't think it's any more
difficult than a soldier on the eve of a
battle or a mother
on the eve of labor you know if it's
especially if it's your second or third
birth you know what you're getting into
you know it's going to be a hard day
you gird your loins and you prepare for
it
and in for my case
i don't think what i did was any more
exotic than someone who wants to climb
mount everest or someone who wants to
go to the north pole personally i don't
know why anybody in their right mind
would want to climb mount everest you
know
but i do understand the explorer's
mentality i wanted to see i wanted to
understand i i wanted to know
and no matter how deep i went i found
that there was always more that i could
be shown that that would be shown me
did you feel you were being
held or guided
in in some
in some sense taken care of in this
journey absolutely and every step along
the way when i would go through this
consciousness was waiting for me and i
might not understand the logic of the
sequence of the pairing of things for
years in fact there are certain things
that i only began to understand when i
wrote the book but as i went through i
had a basic structure
enough to know that there was a logic to
this process and i always felt met
i felt met and engaged sometimes very
consciously where i would ask questions
and it would orchestrate my experience
but always
there was an intelligence meeting me
taking me
educating me
breaking me down beating me down to dust
taking me further taking me back over
and over again until i understood
something and then it would take me
deeper
and there was a systematic progression
to this process which i found that this
systematic progression was really
important because
there's so many levels of consciousness
that it can take you into
but when you enter a new level of
consciousness it's very disorienting i
mean it just cognitively is confusing
and this manifests by not being able to
remember everything that happened to you
you just don't have a framework in your
mind to hold it
but
if you go back to it again and again and
again and you're systematic and rigorous
and you record carefully
your system will acclimate and you will
learn how to stay conscious in
dimensions of reality that previously
had swallowed you
and i actually began in time to realize
that this deeper consciousness was
titrating
the experiences of transcendence
giving me time to absorb and acclimate
even though sometimes i wanted to run on
it kept me and fed me
in small steps so that i could retain
and hold what it had been giving me
because the purpose i found was not
simply to transcend and experience some
form of ecstasy the purpose was to bring
that ecstasy back into your time space
consciousness and first hold on to it
remember it and then secondly digest it
and let it seep into your bones as
deeply as possible
and and you you talked about in the book
is how you framed or you became to
understand
that the hell realms
suffering realms that you would have to
to visit were
uh
for your benefit and they were for
purification
that they were getting you prepared for
the revelation
yeah they're
it's complicated
i mean it took me about two and a half
years to go through what stan groff
calls the perinatal dimension of
consciousness the perinatal level where
the purifications are very intense and
the physical purifications and emotional
purifications which eventually end and
for me ended in ego death you know like
just being shattered my entire physical
identity being turned inside out and
then the ocean of suffering began
and in the beginning i thought this was
a deeper form of personal
suffering it was a deeper form of ego
death but eventually and this is why i
wrote dark knight early dawn at core to
answer this question to solve the riddle
why did the suffering get as large as it
did and the conclusion i came to is that
it really wasn't aimed at my personal
transformation at all
it was aimed
at healing the human species that the
human psyche
in an aggregate form at the collective
unconscious
there are wounds which humanity
has still not healed the things that
we've done to each other in war the
terrible disasters that all the
suffering that human beings have
accumulated not all of it has been
healed
and that there are vast tracts of the
collective psyche where this suffering
still festers
and i i think every spiritual tradition
recognizes
that
in deep spiritual practice you have an
opportunity you don't have to do it
but
an invitation is sometimes extended that
if you are willing to take on some of
that suffering literally just to become
aware of it
it can move through you and resolve
itself just like our personal suffering
enters into our awareness moves through
us and resolves itself
and so for two years
uh i did the ocean of suffering work
um
and it wasn't really until about halfway
through that that i began to understand
that this wasn't for me
it was for my family it was for the
human family
and only later did i begin to understand
the historical circumstances of our
times that made the healing of the human
family the healing of our past so
important in order to clear the
foundation so to speak
to allow
an imminent transformation to take place
in history
and i'm sure that gave you
you mentioned
girding your minds up
that gave you that warrior or soldierly
perspective it's not just about you
chris
you know to to do this thing uh
that was way beyond
way beyond any human capacity to survive
i wouldn't believe just just
on its own but to keep coming back
and uh not and it shifts
from being an individual quest to
everybody and everything and it may be
the case that this
it's largely a function of my choice to
work with these very very high doses
that blow you so deeply into the deep
structure of reality but i think one of
the things i learned it made
this may not open for everybody
everybody may not
enter these domains one of the things i
learned over the course of
my journey
is that
this was a task which my soul took on
before i was born
so
this was part of my karmic choice
to do this work so it wasn't forced upon
me and it wasn't a tragedy
it was simply
part of my life's work
and the universe more than rewarded me
for
this phase of the work because
following the ocean of suffering it took
me places in the illusion of suffering
and afterwards
it
more than amply
paid me or re repaid me for
taking this work on as always happens
whenever you do anything for others the
universe has no choice but to get give
back to you
that's because the universe acts out of
oneness so if we do something for others
it always comes back to you in one form
or another
beautiful
and
and it sounds as though
this
shift you went through from the
assumption with which you ended this
work that
you were doing it for
your own understanding revelation
transformation
and yet you were forced almost against
your
inclinations to
to see this in a larger context that you
were in some way
some mysterious way both
opening to and allowing yourself to be
an instrument for the transformation of
collective consciousness and i can
certainly understand that was
challenging because it's a very
different
it's a different world view it's a very
different set of assumptions about the
nature of ourselves and reality
that even makes that
recognition possible and i i can
certainly understand what a shift that
was would you like to say more about
that
my first concern was that at first it
sounded
like ego gone amuck i mean it sounded
like ego inflation and so i really had
to sit with that for a long time because
my experiences were telling me
that was not what was happening
but the larger challenge is as you said
roger this is a very different world
view
in the classic
individual patient model
you the individual is having experiences
so you the individual has trans personal
experiences
and the individual is always kind of at
the center of the circle
but in this model
my individual existence was completely
secondary
to
this dynamic and so it becomes not a
matter of
my
being being central to what's happening
i got the system i got something started
but i dissolve completely into
pre-existing fields of consciousness and
these fields of consciousness are what
are
the dynamic force having these
experiences
so
it manifests not only in the ocean of
suffering but it manifests later when i
was going into archetypal reality and
causal oneness reality
it's hard to describe but
in many ways in many experiences
i was like
chris bach was like a bit player
not that
it's like there is something going on
this is so challenging that
in the book
i have an appendix which in the appendix
is what dies and is reborn when you
experience so many deaths and rebirths
it becomes a cognitive question what is
it that's actually dying
it feels personal and it if you
experience it
is it just ego dying over and over again
and
the answers that i offer at that in that
part i i know push very very far
i mean because on the one hand it's ego
and then it becomes species ego
and then it becomes something i call the
shamanic persona
but in the end
what is dying i think is literally
some aspect of cosmic consciousness or
some dimension of cosmic reality
is softening and surrendering
and opening up to a still deeper
dimension of cosmic consciousness
and this deeper dimension of cosmic
consciousness pours its blessings
into me at the very bottom but it's not
primarily into me it pours it into the
deeper dimension of cosmic consciousness
itself and i know those are very hard
concepts to
entertain and it's a
it's a very different way of thinking
and it's tentative my
description but something along that
order i think is required to understand
when you explode consciousness this
radically and again
i don't think it's wise
for people to to explode consciousness
this radically i would work with lower
doses i'd work with
psilocybin uh gentler substances if i
were doing it over again
here we have to appreciate that lsd
in this quantity
when it's contained when it's
intensified
in
a therapeutic modality you basically
just shatter your consciousness and
dissolve it far beyond
physical limits
and you spend hours
dissolved into some
stratum
of the universe
and then you congeal and
consolidate it and then you shatter
leaving your historical existence
radically behind
and dissolve into into some fabric some
[Music]
stratosphere
of consciousness
and you live there for a while
it lives you are it part of it as it
lives
and then you
congeal and bring it back
and hold it
beautiful
i'd love i'd love to
tease out several things you said but
but i do want to ask a very
specific question that is you've
referred on several occasions to the
very high doses of lsd used so
might you just tell us what doses you
did use
yeah i aim to be working at 600
micrograms but because
i wasn't using a pharmaceutical
identified
dose i would say 500 to 600 micrograms
to be safe
but it was not less than five that is a
lot of lsd yes
put mildly
and i want to i want to
[Music]
tease out your description of this very
remarkable phenomenon of the death
rebirth experiences which
is
found as a as a
and recognized as a very
important experience and a literal
birth experience like spiritual birth
experience across the world spiritual
traditions
it's deliberately
sought in traditions such as shamanism
and yet you describe it in
not an entirely new way but a
a radically expanded way as a repetitive
process of dying to one
identity and limitation after another
after another after another
reconstituting a
new
new more porous expanded identity and
then having to offer that into into the
whole
and let me just see
check my understanding of death rebirth
against yours and have you
have you respond from your enlarged
perspective to me it seems that
what actually dies what we
confuse ourselves to be
and what actually dies in death rebirth
experience is our self-representation
we mistake a self-image or a
self-concept
or a
self-narrative
for our true self
and what needs to die is that
representation
so it dies we find ourselves opened to a
much larger perspective and possibility
both of both of our own identity and of
the nature of reality
but
for some reason i i tended to think
until
hearing you just now
i tend to think of for psychological
reasons psychodynamic habitual patterns
re-establish themselves and another
self-representation forms
but
you're putting this in a larger more
cosmic
uh or ontological perspective suggesting
that
an even deeper understanding of the of
the death rebirth would be that one
that as part of the cosmic play the
leela the
the
the formation of the universe by
the two
cosmic beings that you describe in one
place in unibook
that
that separation is built into the game
the cosmic game as stan graf would call
it
and
what i'm understanding you to say is
that
identity is reconstituted in a in a
rebirth process because of the
very nature of the of the universe and
consciousness that consciousness
separates so as to play again am i
understanding you correctly
i think your description of uh ego death
is spot on
what dies is what is consumed
is our self-representation
what we have our sense of identity that
we've amassed from our physical
experience and our time space existence
our time space experience
and i also want to mention that every
every medicine has a certain range it
has a certain you know signature and it
has a sort of power and of range
psilocybin
has a certain
depth of range that even if you repeat
it many times it will reach you take you
into the upper register but still there
is a upper register
ayahuasca has a range
it may be i think of it as a deeper
upper register
salvia divinorum has arranged
ketamine and and 5 meo dmt all of these
substances have ranges
now one of the things
an lsd has a range and of course then we
start looking at doses and how doses
affect the range
now i tend to experience psilocybin as a
very body grounded
type of psychedelic experience
very much tuned to my emotional body
uh it opens up a range but it's it it it
stays in a sense
within the parameters it stretches but
does not shatter as aggressively as lsd
does the parameters of individual
identity but it can dissolve them soften
them and open us up
in my experience
in working with high doses of lsd
is that
all of these things happen but because
of the particular
intensity of this substance
[Music]
and its lack of history
anthropologically
it's therefore it doesn't have the feels
associated with it that psilocybin and
masculine or peyote have uh associated
with it
it tends to
shatter our time space identity and
throw us in a level of experience that
lies
beyond that reality in a spiritual
reality
but if we
if we uh go back to that place again and
again
our experience there begins to congeal
and we develop
a an alternative identity persona i call
it the shamanic persona
it is
an identity which is comprised
of all of my experiences at that level
of transpersonal reality
and it's kind of super ordinate to my
individual
egoic identity
but it's stable if my experiences have
been well managed it's stable so that
when i go into a psychedelic space and i
transition away from time and space and
i i enter into
a familiar sense of self at a certain
level of
spiritual reality
but if
and i i i acclimate there i i learn how
to stay conscious there i
i learn the ropes and then i
but if i keep pushing the edge if i if
the if the chemical is strong enough and
if the intent is focused enough
eventually
in my experience you come to the ceiling
and at that ceiling there is a
cost that's exacted
another round of death takes place but
what's dying is not the ego what's dying
is that shamanic persona or that second
identity because that second identity is
a holder of a certain level of
transpersonal experience and if you want
to go
deeper you don't need to but if you want
to go deeper you've got to die
at that lower shamanic level
and so the shamanic identity dies and
you transition into yet another level of
reality
in which the whole workings of the
universe is different
in different rules
different phenomena exist different
bandwidths so to speak and you must
acclimate to that level of reality
every step deeper into the universe is a
step into a higher level of energy
and you and to acclimate at a particular
level of reality you must acclimate to
the energy and that
some of the the very very intense
cleansing that continues to take place
30 40 50 sessions in
is because you're you're you're learning
how to stabilize consciousness is
extremely high levels of energy
and that just takes a long time
so
so what eventually came out of all of
this is apprecia is an understanding
that death and rebirth is stage specific
that there are many levels of the
universe and if you systematically push
through those levels
there are
gates that you come to so to speak
and at each gate
there is a sacrifice asked
now
at the end eventually once you've died
so many times death becomes a
meaningless concept
because you always learn that you're
always going to be reborn some essence
of our identity will continue
the phoenix always rises
eventually
the concept or the
the concept of death as an
interpretation of what's happening
yielded to a concept of purification i
learned that all dying is in fact
purification it's just that when
purification reaches so deep it's
destructuring
whatever
self-representation or whatever reality
representation you're operating within
it becomes
purification unto death it's actually
dissolving the structures within which
you are holding reality
and death so it's it's death
but it's a fluid death it's a
purification
process
so so chris following up what roger
asked about what dies well what doesn't
die
[Laughter]
because in your book you talk a lot
about reincarnation has been being a
given
in in the universe as it was revealed to
you this universe multiverse whatever
this
mysterium tremendous
is that that you've
brought back to us to talk about so
what does it die
well
i think when we go deep we realize that
everything is dying constantly
everything is dying and living and dying
and living constantly there there are no
stable things which are not dying in
this universe
and uh to see that clearly of is of
course is is considered a great
accomplishment to really understand that
everything is temporary everything is
transitioned everything is moving
everything is fluid holding on
you know
people have asked me what is it that
dies and you
know there is what i will say is there
is
there is always continuity of memory
if you do your if you organize your
session well there is continuity of
recall so therefore there is continuity
of memory
you might say that memory doesn't die
but i don't really think that's the best
way to describe it i think memory is
shattered
and
reconstitutes into it i don't know of
i don't know what doesn't die but here's
here something is being purified right
what is that what is that that's being
pure
well i'd go farther and say um i think
that in this process that life gives
birth to individuality
not an ego not a self but life is giving
birth to an individuality and the nature
of that individuality matures and
deepens
as the soul
matures and deepens and as one's
spiritual experiences deepen
uh
my understand i mean the vedantic
traditions and many spiritual traditions
basically believe that the individual is
an illusion and the goal is to shatter
the illusion and to dissolve
irretrievably into
the oneness of all existence
i understand that cosmology but i think
it's a mistake and it doesn't jive with
my experience
the universe
is
is very intensely interested in birthing
an individuality and in aging that
individuality and refining that
individuality and maturing it so that in
the end
we die but we die in order to grow up
and we die again in order to grow up in
the end
this is what i call
the birth of the diamond soul that
reincarnation
basically is
aging us stage by stage level by level
helping us grow and to become more than
we were more than we were but sooner or
later
we reach a point
where all of our former lives and all of
the history all the experiences and
wisdom and mistakes we've made all of it
comes together
into an integrated singularity
and as i've experienced that singularity
when i experienced that happen in my
sessions there was an absolute i was
catapulted into a state of awareness
beyond anything i had experienced up to
that point in time
i was an individual
but i was an individual in pure shunyata
emptiness condition transparent open to
all existence
i was individual but
within a boundless existence but i had
my full memory intact
and i think that this is where the
universe or the divine is taking all
human beings
that individuality is not the problem
separation is the problem
ego
boundedness is the problem
individuality is not the problem
individuality is the great beauty
it's one of the great gifts that the
creator is giving us the opportunity to
be an individual
chris can you draw a distinction there
between the individual individuality and
separation let me see if i'm
understanding individuality gives a
sense of the recognition of
of
i can't come up with another word that's
into being an individual
but separation usually is
but but the individual can be so there
can be a sense of individuality within
the recognition of one's innate
uh connection with dependence on an
ultimate unity with the all or the pure
consciousness
is that how you would distinguish from
separation where there is a forgetting
of the connection to the greater whole
yeah
i think
when buddhism teaches
and when it teaches anata no self
they are not they're basically defining
a type of self-experience where this we
experience ourselves cut off from other
selves
we experience ourselves
as
cut off and away from the universe
itself
when that self
dies
one experiences an individuality which
is porous
to others and that is we live in
compassion and we experience an
individuality which is in communion with
surrounding
layers and layers of
consciousness
so that there is a spiritual openness
and a
an openness of compassion to other
beings
we are still an individual but we are
an individual that's situated within the
boundaryless condition
and
so
[Music]
and it sounds as though it may take me a
little moment to unravel this but it
sounds as though you're saying there's a
value
in that individuality
and i'm reminded of ramakrishna the
great
indian mystic who
was just extraordinarily fluid in his
ability to roam through different
realizations and states and he described
being lost in unity but
but then longing for separation so that
he could worship and relate to the
mother
so there were both sides there and i
hear something similar here
uh there are some traditions you pointed
to advaita vedanta for example where the
where the self is regarded as an
illusion the fundamental reality is our
inseparability or is rather the
non-duality of
existence
and yet it sounds like you're pointing
to you out of your own and here's the
beauty of it it came out of your own
experience
you were aware of all these traditions
these ontologies cosmologies metaphysics
and yet out of your own experiences
it feels like you came to the sense that
there is a beauty and perfection in the
individuality in and of itself is that
correct
it is
uh it is and let me frame it this way
uh before the before time and space
existed before the physical universe
existed
when everything was in the pure fertile
void condition
uh when whatever you want to call the
absolute made a choice to manifest
physical existence
the physical universe
is the only thing strong enough i think
to
shatter
the
the oneness of the absolute
into pieces that then can become
individually awakened to what it is
within the body of the divine
so the
the great gift
of the physical universe or one of the
great gifts of the physical universe is
literally the density that causes
the oneness of the divine to shatter
into pieces so that those pieces can
become operational as divine within the
body of the divine
and in that context individuality i
think is one of the great gifts
of creation is one of the great gifts of
of the universe and i don't think the
creator
wants to destroy that individuality
after billions and billions of years of
getting us to this point
finally when we wake up and become
conscious and we can drop our conscious
down to source and understand
and identify that part of us which is
universal which is oneness with all the
universal with what is alive i don't
think the intention is then to simply
say okay let's destroy that
i think we're growing and i think we're
going to be growing for billions and
billions and billions of years more we
are just getting started
in this process of waking up to the
to the
vast expanse of existence
and yet
we're waking up in a way in which we
become lovers of it we become servants
of it we become
a fractal embodiment of it
all these different metaphors for
describing this mystery of the dance let
me just say that that
i've seen the same thing
and you expressed it
much more eloquently and and i feel like
i'm a yellow belt you know i'm talking
to a 10th don or something like that
but uh yeah that somehow in in the all
the preciousness of the individual
that is
that infinitely more precious at the
same time it's a yes and it's this and
that
and it's working itself out and uh
that's come through very clearly
for me at times and i had to rethink a
lot of my ideas about psychology given
that and uh feels deeply human at a good
at a deep level
and also let me say what you were what
you were describing is your experience
and at some point
self awakens okay dink that just opens
that's just uh
jesus said a man must be born again well
what happens when you're born you're
just a little helpless infant you're not
good for anything that's like being
precious
and uh
that's the beginning of the journey and
then it seems that you're talking about
a christ-like or a bodhisattva
responsibility at a certain point we
have to take on the responsibility not
just for own awakening our own mistakes
our own suffering
but for
for the all for the collective
and that adds uh
i guess the word is a nobility
to the task
that otherwise would just be
very narcissistic if you will and just
very you know chasing your tail but but
that
that understanding that quality that you
express at a deep deep level is um
i think is essential and because we have
the archetype of jesus of a human being
boom an individual who was crucified and
and murdered in this most horrible way
almost imaginable who then goes down
into the underworld but comes back
uh still him
barely recognizable some of his
disciples didn't but at some level a
transform level that uh
has kept the rest of us running in his
you know his path for a couple of
thousand years but that's a story of the
individual that's contained within our
western uh
our western
treasure chest of
wisdom stories
yeah
yeah it is a story of divine incarnation
come to fruition
and i think that story has archetypal
ramifications that are much larger than
the christology that was developed to
under to interpret it which ended up
making jesus into a unique being
when really he's a prototype
yeah
beautiful nice nice yeah and that that
seems to be a major
division that occurs in
each of the great religions and probably
other many others as well
uh and perhaps reflecting different
different developmental psychological
developmental stages on the people who
make the interpretation the the
the founder is either elevated to unique
status which the rest of us can only
approximate at best
or is recognized as an exemplar and as
you called a prototype of the capacities
and potentials latent within us
seems a very important distinction you
point to there yeah
yeah
and
i want to mention that
as you said john
when you begin to experientially tap
into that in us which is universal
then eventually all aspects of your life
heeds too
to come in alignment with that
and that's why love is is you know deep
you know
not eros but i got pay love
and compassion
social justice fairness
naturally arises as one's spiritual
practice deepens because
you have discovered this hybrid nature
within yourself you are individually
awake
and
awake to a universal bond the universal
you know level of reality that becomes
an expression simply of your true nature
it's just spontaneous
and i also want to mention that um
i i don't think you have you certainly
don't have to go
where i went
in order to spiritually awaken even if
you wanted to use psychedelics or
spiritual awakening to me
there's
three uses that i'd separate
using of psychedelics for healing
using of psychedelics to spiritual
awakening
and then a third which is what my
journey became
a cosmological exploration
if i wanted to use psychedelics for
simply spiritual awakening i would
recommend a protocol working with very
low doses because it's about dissolving
the ego and you got to get after where
the ego lives in the world and that's
closer to time-space realities you do
not need to shatter time to become
spiritually awakened you don't need to
enter archetypal reality you don't need
to go back to the beginning of the
universe to become genuinely
enthusiastically spiritually awakened
what i started kind of aiming at
spiritual awakening but the method was
so powerful it shoved me in a way past
that or through that
into a deeper
into a different agenda
and i'm entirely
sympathetic to spiritual teachers who
would say you know your time would be
better spent
cultivating and abiding the abiding
presence of the transparent condition
then
learning these going on this quest to
learn how the universe is put together
in these different levels and i
understand that critique and i i share
it to a degree myself i wonder sometimes
whether i would have
my time would have been better spent
focusing more on the enlightenment side
of the things than the cosmic
exploration side
but
what happened in my work is that it
pushed deeper into the cosmological
exploration sign well you said you were
a philosopher
yeah and you went with the philosopher's
quest into this journey
and uh
exactly what you said it's exactly what
you did so uh there's there's no
flip-flopping there
and you did it with a very specific
uh aspiration and intention chris
uh i recall that you said before each
session
you would affect you effectively offer
yourself
as an instrument for the highest good of
all
very similar to the bodhisattva for
aspiration or even reminded me of jesus
statement not my will but thine it
really felt like a
an offer a an unrestricted offering of
yourself
as an instrument for
uh for acquiring
whatever wisdom you could
was opened to you or you were gifted or
graced with
in order to
be an instrument of transmission to
others and
it feels like your your prayer was
answered very clearly um and you talked
about well you know
it could have been as valuable to to
just do spiritual practice and perhaps
perhaps that's true but and
it's kind of like let a thousand
spiritual flowers bloom you ca you gave
us a new kind of flower and we are
benefiting from it and who knows how
many people other other people will
benefit from it so
wonderful that you did what you did and
beautiful that you did it with that
aspiration and prayer
it feels like your prayer was answered
yeah
chris how do you what do you do these
days
i mean to keep yourself
uh man you went on the journey and uh
like
you know just remarkable uh and you came
back and you mentioned that you're
teaching do you have
a way of
staying awake
to everything that you were gifted
everything that you were shown or do you
find in the transmission and the
teaching that that's what keeps you
still
crisp base in this
limited reality but at the same time
[Music]
in touch with and transmitting uh what
you learn on the other side if you will
you know there's a question i ask in the
book
what is the value of true but temporary
knowledge
and i don't doubt that any of the
experience that i had on my journeys was
true
and i also know it was temporary and uh
it i could i i cannot live in those
places that the places where i've been i
can't
the idea of bringing them back and
integrating them as a stable state is
that it may be true for certain levels
of experience but some of the deeper
experiences
and not possible
uh at least not in not in my present
level of psychospiritual development i
know that there are great beings who can
who are masters of these domains and
always they are the they are my guiding
light but i know that chris's abilities
are not
cannot stabilize these states of
consciousness in my present life
i
use
those experiences
in order to
i use them in my meditation practice i
use them in my vajrayana practice
they are they are the samaya saatva that
opens me to the janana satra so they are
the
being of practice it opens me to the
being of reality of these things
but i also have
a certain and a lot of my time these
days is spent grounding just being
grounded staying grounded
living in touch with the earth
because i spent so many years
out in the far reaches of the cosmos
that it's
good to be in touch with the earth and
grounding on the earth
but most of all uh
i'm a teacher i mean i just i love to
find things and to share them
and during all the years when i was
doing this work i could not really share
them i really could not share them
directly in my classes
now the first time i shared them was in
dark knight early dawn where i addressed
experiences that had come up in the
first half of my journey up to about the
halfway point
uh in lsd in the mind of the universe
are what i prefer to call it the name
that it had for me in all the years i
wrote it
diamonds from heaven
that's
i shared the whole extent of the journey
but to me the most important part of it
all
is the chapter on the birth of the
future human and the final vision
what was
because the work was so little focused
on me and so much focused on the human
family
it see it just became natural that
and i guess this is
by some larger cosmic design
the story that kept being pounded into
me and i kept it kept being shown over
and over again
was the human story where humanity is in
its evolution what we are coming to the
pivot point that we are coming in into
in history the absolute shift which is
taking place at an archetypal level at
really at the plate tectonics of the art
of the collective psyche that we're
coming to a tipping point
where
a tipping point that will change the
condition of the human psyche at the
collective level not just an aggregate
in number of individuals but there is a
shift taking place underneath us at the
collective psychic level
that is going to mark a before and after
in human history this was shown me again
and again and then years later
i was taken i was dissolved into the
human species i mean i just dissolved
without remainder
and then was taken into the death and
rebirth of humanity
not in any details not given details of
when exactly when where or how but that
humanity was going to go through an epic
an era when it would completely lose
control
all the assumed
all the assumptions of life were going
to be stripped away
we were going to go through a crushing
ordeal as a species an ordeal that would
be so terrible
for time we would think that this is the
end we're going extinct as a species on
this planet
but in my visionary experience we come
through this
we survive
and we are absolutely
changed
in the process
uh
when we come through this crisis this
long crisis
we have reached we reached have reached
something inside ourselves we have
cracked open our heart we have cracked
open our mind
the humanity that emerges from the
historical period is a changed humanity
it is a deeper humanity it is a more
open and more mature humanity
one of the ways putting together
different things from my sessions
i've come to believe that this crisis
that we're coming through with a global
systems crisis driven by a series of
ecological crisis just tremendous
converging forces that
we are increasingly aware of these days
but this is a crisis of consciousness we
literally cannot afford to try to run
this planet any longer as a at from the
egoic level of consciousness that the
ego is
separated and it leads to a divided
world
and i think what's happening is we're
the soul is coming forward in history i
mentioned the diamond soul i think we
are literally growing up into
our full
soul being
and that we're coming to a point where
when we incarnate we will never be
tempted to identify just with this body
but we will know ourselves to be
a hundred thousand year old being
and we will know that the planet that we
are leaving is the planet that we will
return to
we know we have these deep karmic
connections with everyone around us and
we know that we are all embedded in the
oneness of the divine consciousness
this is the magnitude of the transition
that we're going through and i think
that
all of us in all of our spiritual
practices
are contributing to this transition and
i think it's why so many people are
having such very very intense
yogic practices and and meditational
practices and past life therapy
practices
because there's this is tremendous
unloading which is taking place which is
part of a collective healing which is
making way
for this awakening of something new
in history
chris you gave a beautiful description
of one of the more well there's so many
profound openings and insights you had
but you did have a profound recognition
of the
possible future ahead of us as a human
species which you just summarized
briefly
and your insights are resonant with the
sense that seems to be growing among
many people that we are coming to a time
of
extraordinary crisis and opportunity i
think of that combination being very
well expressed perhaps best expressed by
a mutual friend of ours dwayne elgin
whose many books on
on the transition we as a as a species
are facing
really point to uh current time as a
bottleneck in which there is
we really
may face
a
if not civilizational collapse at worst
then a loss of a lot of
our current
capacities as a species and the death of
many many people yet
also he points to the possibility of
this being
uh
could be if we
bring enough awareness
uh aspiration pure heartedness to the
process it could be a kind of collective
rebirth
i'd love to hear you speak more about
how
the vision that seems to be emerging
among a number of
people with this deep concern about our
future
meshes with your the insight you were
given
yeah duane is uh is a real brother in
all of this and i've been deeply and
shaped or informed as i've digested my
own experiences by his
methodical
combing through all the ecological data
and the social data looking at our the
converging forces in history through
several of his books
uh
i
i can only speak or i should only speak
out of my visionary experience because i
have
i have a certain familiarity second hand
through people
authors like dwayne and other writers of
our time in history but
my sense of this is really informed
primarily by my visionary experience
and so let me stay just there
um
and again i had
this took place for me
these visions took place going back
to 1990
through
1995-96 so i was very ecologically
uninformed 25 years ago when these took
place i was
not aware of the
what what's happening culturally and
historically
as i have
when i first had the experience of the
death and rebirth of humanity
it took me about a year to recover from
that experience
and i felt like i was
as i say in the book i felt like i was
walking around hiroshima a week before
the bomb was to be dropped
knowing what was coming
with profound compassion
and deep
respect for all human beings on the
planet
knowing that they had all volunteered to
participate in this grand exercise
and at a deep soul level that they knew
what was coming even though at an egoic
level
they may be did not know what was coming
it took me a year and a lot of work to
stabilize and ever since that time
through the early 90s i've held this
this knowing in my body i mean it
literally lives in my body what's
happening
and then as
as i become more informed by the
historians and by the the ecologists and
the environmentalists and we really
begin to see
get a better hand a grip on global
climate change and whatnot
it meshes it seems to mesh very well
with what the inner experience is
with the variants that there are some
people who are serious students of the
data
who believe that we're not going to make
it
the data is just so strong that we've
already had our shot and even though
we're living on borrowed time and we
will not make it through this transition
we are essentially extinct already
and all i can say is that in my
experience that's not what happens and
and it's it's not because the crunch
that's coming is not as bad as we think
it's going to be it's going to bring us
to our collective knees it's going to be
worse than
we are now
even envisioning
it's going to to just break us down
completely
that's a very painful and
probably very realistic vision it sounds
like at least from what i understand of
the data and
and
we come through we come through we come
through we don't come through
but a new we is born i believe that
these historical pressures that are
building are literally
a birth they are truly giving birth and
that to the future human
but then the question is well what will
this future human look like what is
actually being born in history
what do we mean
is this just more of an analogy or some
what do we mean when we say it's a birth
and the way i understand this i go back
and i i look at it through
reincarnational
lens i mean you know that i believe that
reincarnation is a
empirically demonstrated fact of life
ian stevenson and other scholars have
just demonstrated that reincarnation is
true my first book on life cycles was
about reincarnation the when i look at
the universe i see
i see our planet
pulsing in and out of time in space
reincarnating beings i see us
century by century
millennia by millennia
beings reincarnating time and time again
in giving birth
labor is very i mean
gestation is long
labor and birth is short and intense
i think the human family has been
gestating the future human for hundreds
of thousands of years we have been
gestating the future
in the dynamics of reincarnation
the labor that is taking place i think
is a short intense convulsive period
but what we are giving birth to
is already
foreshadowed
once we understand the dynamics of
reincarnation what is coming forward i
think truly
is the consciousness which holds all of
our reincarnational experience as a
simultaneous
present
this is a consciousness that we all
contact if everything goes well when we
die when we're born we're contracted to
small ego when we die we return to the
soul
when we're born we contract into another
ego when we die we return to the soul
that holds all of our memories
not fragmented but integrated as a
single being
if we keep this up over and over sooner
or later the soul
awakens
inside
human incarnation
and i think that's the being that's
being born
in this historical crisis
souls will live on this planet
differently than egos
live on this planet
i think all the great spiritual leaders
of the axial age were all foreshadowing
were giving us teachings that were
helping bring this about they were all
teaching us to think deep to look deep
to feel deep and to
to to allow
the needs of others
to
become super ordinate to our own
individual needs but not canceling out
they were inviting us to to live
old to live wide
and i think now
just as we are trying to become one
planet
ecologically
politically
the world citizen is emerging
that is being matched by something is
taking place inside us so as the world
is trying to become one
we are trying to become
one soul
integrated within ourselves
and i think we're going to make it my
experience at least my visionary
experiences while nothing is nothing is
decided nothing is determined
predetermined
my experiences that we make it
but this is not the end of the story of
course this is simply the next stage of
human evolution
human evolution is going to continue as
long as the universe is alive
so whatever we're doing now
it will be superseded eventually
by yet another stage
of in our development in our spiritual
development but this is a particularly
important stage right now
and chris you
in one sentence i think you
you
[Music]
elucidated a very important point a kind
of pivot point for
this possible
rebirth of the human species you said
nothing is predestined it's up to us
so
that's a big statement
yeah
yeah it it i mean if it's
if everything were predestined there
would be no point incarnating right
because if everything had to be the way
it's got to be then we wouldn't be
learning
and if we're not learning there would be
no
adventure here
so it is open-ended we could lose the
planet we could lose this opportunity
it's going to require our very very best
and our very deepest in order to
come through this
changed and built better
so
from that perspective then
your vision may not be
one of
this is the way it's going to be
but rather here is the possibility to
which we can allow so we can open
ourselves you know yes and i have to
acknowledge that i think this has
happened i think
there are some times when people who
nearly die
part of their life review they have a
life preview
and sometimes what the and they see of
the future which does come true
and sometimes they see a future which
they can change and i talk about this in
the book can rings work heading toward
omega
and so if they're seeing a future that
they can change they're seeing a
conditional future not an absolute
preset future
so i think what you're saying is true
that
what i'm seeing is a possible future
maybe even a probable future but a
possible future that we still have to
enact
so i i say yes to that
and i have to add a postscript
some of my experiences have taken me so
far into the future into what i call
deep time not eternity
but into time but a different modality
of time
have taken me into the
into deep time
and have
given me an experience of this
historical transition that humanity
is making
not as a future event but as a past
event
that's something that we have
accomplished
so
from that perspective from that deep
cosmological expect perspective
if i were speaking from that voice
i would say
we will make this
transition
nature
knows what it's doing
nature has not brought us here
unprepared
the genius of the universe that we see
in dna and galaxies the genius that
saturates every piece of the universe
knows what it's doing
when it brings us when it to this
particular critical turning point we
will make it we will
become more than we have ever been
before
beautiful
may it be so and
and from my own perspective which is
not having had your visions agnostic
about the
whether we'll make it or not it seems
like
whatever perspective we hold the only
thing to do with our lives is to
do what you did to offer them
in the service of human well-being and
and survival
is that congruent with your
absolutely well
it's it's going to take all of our our
very very best efforts
to move forward
and uh to move forward deeply
and
with a deep heart with an open mind
absolutely
all all hands on deck
beautiful
chris i get i get a feeling from you uh
just you know my hit
as a man who's
heeded
uh the calls in his life
you went
and you became educated and you got all
that part squared away in your life so
that later on you'd be in a position
much better position
to share what you were
called again to learn
and you had the courage to keep it up
my god that is a miracle in itself
over those 73 journeys and that
that you're also at peace with yourself
because now you're giving back this
vision you did this work and the work
continues in the sharing of it
and that
that's a pretty good place to be
yes it is a good place to be um
it's always a good place to be when one
comes to a point in one's life where one
feels that one has done what was asked
to be done
and
then the rest is gravy
now i'm in the situation writing the
book when i finished writing the book i
i knew
that i could i could die
at peace
because that was the closure of the
project
now i'm in a new
phase where i'm trying to figure out
how to make what i did useful to other
people
how can i serve other people
carrying the knowledge or the memories
that i have how can i make it useful to
people
um and i'm still figuring that out i
i don't
i'm still trying to figure out
how i can be useful to other people who
are on their own spiritual path on their
own intellectual path who are doing
things i i can't imagine
doing
uh wonderful things
how can i be useful to them to support
them in their process as we enter this
time in history
beautiful and and it sounds like that's
a
a question that's really been with you
and challenging you and i i just want to
put it in a context it seems like there
are two different kinds of questions
there are knowledge questions
is it raining outside look outside no in
the question they're wisdom questions
which
seem more like coins they're questions
you can ask repeatedly each time you do
they take you deeper into the question
deeper into yourself deeper into life
and sounds like this is your
your wisdom question or yours as
sometimes called your sacred question
that is now
to the forefront in your life
it is
and i know that
when i have the opportunity to be with
like-minded spirits like-minded beings
and
we talk about these things
i know that
something happens inside me that my
shell is pretty thin anyway
but something happens and i get porous
and when i get porous
a larger knowing
flows through me
works with me
i become irrelevant
but the teaching teaches itself in that
way
and that's that's really why i wrote the
living classroom because
this was happening in my classroom
i never ever was able i never talked
about my psychedelic work to my students
i didn't bring it into the classroom i
built a firewall between my spiritual
practice and my teaching work
but i found that
the deeper i went into
the consciousness of the universe in my
spiritual practice the more it began to
activate
students in my classroom the more there
was an unconscious transmission an
activation taking place
which i had to learn how to manage and
how to control
not control but how to manage
in order to keep everything safe for
everybody in the classroom
so
i've learned
how that works and i've learned that
when you throw a stone into the lake it
naturally ripples out entirely and so
everybody when we do steep deep practice
naturally people around us are going to
be touched and are going to be
influenced
so i know that
when i
when people's questions take me to
reflect upon
life in a way which is informed by my
experiences
there is a gathering and a reinforcing
that takes place between their
psyches and my psyche and together we
become more
and there is a
transmission that sometimes happens and
a healing that sometimes happens that no
one is in control of
and yet it seems to be
the work
now what's happened since the book has
come out
covetous has shut down personal
uh contact of that sort
so that i've been in a period of
incubation and we're having lots of zoom
meetings and basically i've been
incubating and trying to
see where this is going see where it
wants to go i'm about to begin a seven
week online course on the book which
will give us another opportunity to push
this a little bit farther how much can
we actually
give this transmission
online i would rather be doing it in
person but right now it's an online
world
well from where i'm sitting it feels
like it works pretty well
and chris what's the name of the course
so listeners can find it well it
actually hasn't been given a name yet
this is going to be on the shift network
the shift network is producing it it's
going to be on lsd in the mind of the
universe
but
we haven't settled on a name it might it
may be called diamonds from heaven
it may be called a spiritual journey
into the mind and heart of the universe
but it'll be on shift network starting
the middle of november and it starts
november 30th
and chris do you find that people are
responding
uh such as it is given the times that we
live in are
how's it going are the books selling are
your people going oh my god have you met
any fellow travelers who maybe
had
similar
um you know experiences and and
note i mean
from my experiences what you're saying
really corresponds and deepens and fills
out you know what i've learned in my own
journey in my own life so
uh how's it going
it's going just as you say there's
nothing
unique about my experiences it's just
it's in a it's in a group of all of our
collective experiences it pushes the
boundaries in certain ways
but i've had many people write me and
say i you know you've you've clarified
what my experience has been here's what
i've experienced around this topic and
i've had many people write and say i've
never touched psychedelics in my life
but i've had many experiences that are
completely in alignment with your
experiences let me explain to you my
experience and it's so it's clearly this
is this is a large pattern
uh that's coming up within
the the collective psyche as a whole
um and and it's been a joy it's a joy to
share and then to enter into
conversation with other journeyers
what's important is not any one person's
experience clearly what's important is
the
in this case the psychedelic experiences
are the psychedelic and spiritual
experiences of the entire human family
when we put all of our experiences on
the table then we can sort out which
ones are
not essential or which ones are
idiosyncratic and find the ones that are
universal and are more
epistemologically valuable
and to do that we have to put all of our
experiences on the table so for me
i'm simply putting my experiences on the
table in dialogue with other people as
we all put our experiences on the table
and then we begin a conversation
of those experiences
and i think we're still in the early
stages i mean i think the the book you
edited roger of the early psychedelic
elders
you know that work was putting
a certain generation's insights on the
table and i think it's beginning again
the tricky part right now for me and as
people absorb my work is
the focus of the psychedelic renaissance
is psychedelic therapy
and that's exactly where it should be
healing the human psyche
careful
um control studies
lots of brain wave maps you know and all
that stuff and
very very careful control studies
and to a certain degree
my work rocks that boat
because it's it doesn't follow that
protocol it uses extreme doses high
doses it's using a very very powerful
chemical
which doesn't lend itself to healing as
much as well as mdma or psilocybin
and so there's a certain tension i think
between the therapeutic focus of the
present very important work being done
and in my work
and yet there is a huge underground
psychedelic community
which is not weighted for a scientific
validation
and
this community i think is
been having a conversation among itself
for many many years
and i think my work is being
received very well in that community
beautiful
yes
and
and you spoke
of
you know you're still exploring the next
question
uh you spoke of a period of some years i
think 20 years of assimilating these
experiences so
so
it sounds like the pros process of
integration has been
very long and has had its own challenges
and
perhaps that's not a topic that's given
enough attention in spiritual circles
there's a lot of focus on doing the
practices and opening to particular
states of consciousness and insights but
but not so much perhaps on the
very essential work of integration which
is an assimilation
of the experiences a reflection on them
are recognizing their implications
dialoguing about them in community
anything which allows us to
come to a broader understanding of their
implications and possibilities and to
and and their implications for how best
how now should we live
yes
yes there is a book that's just been
published called psychedelics and
psychotherapy
uh that is a collection really focuses
on this issue of integration i have a an
article in it
uh very important i think that
we're we're getting past the stage where
the excitement over being able to break
through to these dimensions of
consciousness is kind of calming down
and we're beginning to realize that the
real issue is what do we do with these
experiences how can we hold them how do
we integrate them
um
how do we integrate them
individually
in small community and how do we
integrate them intellectually
so that we
shift the paradigm of the reality that
we're living within it and of course
psychedelic experiences
um support the paradigm of a living
universe that the universe is not dead
matter but the entire universe is alive
it supports the paradigm of an
intelligence orders and orders and
orders of intelligence that lie behind
and within
physical existence
so
there's so many levels to it
and and and i would offer my own
experiences uh some
of what not to do i mean i'm deadly
serious when i say
i think i i pushed myself harder than
was wise
at the end when i was
this the chapter that was the hardest
chapter in the book to write
was the last chapter coming off the
mountain
where i reflect upon
the years after i stopped my sessions
took me a year just to write that
chapter
i thought i paid a lot of attention to
integration throughout my work i wrote
all my sessions down i i did a lot of
spiritual practice throughout and even
though i couldn't teach this stuff i had
it in conversation with my partner at
the time
and
i really
i paid a lot of attention to individual
integration
i wrote the living classroom to
reflect tell the story of how i took
care of my students who are being
touched by the work so social
integration
so i thought that when i stopped these
sessions
i would be able to
step away
and i would live with the bounty of the
extraordinary gifts that i had been
given and the most important of which
which emerged in the last five years of
the work we haven't talked about yet but
the diamond luminosity sessions that
those particular
immersions into
dharmakaya the clear light of absolute
reality
but what i found was that
in the years following
in five or six years following my
sessions when i stopped
i had entered what i called the deep
sadness
it was a period of withdrawal
into a loneliness
from not being able to return
to such ecstatic experiences
of being dissolved into light literally
just into light
i knew that i needed to stop i for
reasons i touched i i knew it was
important for me to stop i had to spend
years absorbing what i had
but there was such an unfulfilled
longing
to return
to those dimensions of reality
that i found
i reached a point where i realized
i was just waiting to die
i was taking care of my children i was
taking care of my students i was not
suicidal i was
living a balanced life
but in my heart i was just waiting to
die
and i
with more time i realized
something's wrong here
this is not the way this work is
supposed to end this is
not i made a mistake somewhere along the
way i made a mistake
and i began to wonder is it possible to
have too much god
but i knew the entire physical universe
was god i knew that the divine is
everything that exists so it's not a
matter of having too much god because i
knew god was i was living inside god
so what was the mistake and eventually i
came to to see that the mistake
was not too much divine of the divine
but it was too much transcendence
there is a balancing act between
transcending time and space
and being embodied inside time and space
and there are truths in each of these
realities
and i had plunged myself so deeply
beyond time and space so many times into
such
intimacy with that which supports time
and space
that i lost my bearings i lost my
foothold
inside time and space
and i had to so i made a an absolute
decision
to ground myself inside time and space
and to let what i had experienced in
these subtle states of consciousness to
let it
work its way into me
i had to literally not alter my
consciousness
so that these states of awareness could
enter into
my physical being
whereas previously it had entered into
my altered
being now it had if it was ever going to
enter into my physical body i had to sit
still
and let it come to me
because as you know in these states
nothing in reality changes
we don't do anything
we simply wake up to something that's
always been there it's always been there
and
i had reached a point where i simply had
to
to sort of be patient and let this
transformation take place
and so in a sense on the one hand
there's nothing more for me to do
and on another hand yeah there's
something more to me for me to do
yeah
and
you're talking now about a very
interesting topic you're talking about
the traps that can go with this kind of
deep work and usually we talk about
traps on the spiritual path or with
psychedelic says
similarly we usually talk about the
earlier paths the traps are being
overwhelmed fear
of terror of acting out certain
psychodynamics of ego inflation
taking these experiences to be proof of
our unique trans-personal
nature and specialness
and yet you're pointing to some of the
traps that can occur
significantly further along
it sounds like you're talking about
uh
about
well
one way of framing what you just said
this deep sadness or loss losses would
of course be and you do this in your
book i think the in terms of the dark
knight of the souls and john of the
cross the
the challenge that comes when we taste
something so transcendent so divine so
inspiring
and then lose that contact in a way
and you're talking about the
some of the traps that can come with the
sheer amount of energy coursing through
one's body and the
and the
uh the possibility of transmission as a
result
and of being seduced by those capacities
so
so this is a very this is another kind
of gift you're giving us pointing out
giving us
the beginnings of a map of the more
advanced traps that can come the traps
that happen when everything goes right
ah
deficiency but when everything goes
right you can have too much of a good
thing i've found i didn't know that at
the beginning but you can is it too much
or is it our attitude towards it
i think you can have too much of a good
thing in the sense that
i think in every one lifetime
most of us we can only integrate so much
and productively and i think it's
possible to bite off more than we can
really thoroughly chew
and sometimes i think i bit off more
than i could
more than was wise for me to chew and
but you're absolutely right there are so
many pitfalls on this path
uh ego inflation thinking you're special
because you've had a special experience
and it's so important to stay grounded
really grounded grounded grounded so
that all of these things wash through
you
and
my wife was was very good at helping me
remember always always what's important
is not what happens on the day of your
session
what's important is what you can do the
day after your session
it's it's that you it is how you live
your life
in the world
carrying the insights that you've had as
best as you can into your fallible
life
and
recommitting yourself to purifying your
life of all of its ex all of its you
know messy garbage and
living a clean and compassionate and
proper life
that that continues just because you've
become one with god
what happens is i don't actually these
days i don't know why anyone would want
to become one with god because once you
do that it triggers enormous
purification processes that don't stop
i mean it's just it goes on and on you
know it just deepens
yeah there are lots of ways for this
path to go wrong
[Music]
and yet there was something which
in the in the way you approached this
that allowed you
[Music]
not there were ways you got caught but
they weren't the gross ways they weren't
you didn't harm others
you
but there were subtle ways in which you
get you got caught such as the dark
knight of the soul but you always you
worked your way out of it what do you
what do you attribute that to
i contribute i attribute that to
good company the people i was with
my former wife carol we were married for
24 years
she is the mother of all my children
she was my sitter for all my sessions
she never did a session herself
she is a very serious vadriana
practitioner she has since gone on to
complete her three-year retreat
so she's she's a llama
acknowledged as such and she
was a great help
keeping me grounded
during all these years when i was
you know going in and out of the
universe
my teaching just my children kept me
grounded teaching kept me grounded but
studying the great masters
because the more i studied the great
masters the more it it showed me my own
uh imperfections it all it showed me
what i was not
by looking at their greatness and so i
never
i could never take myself
they kept me
honest
with myself as i went
my students kept me honest because you
know i
i had to earn a living teaching at an
open enrollment university and i'm
walking into a classroom filled with
people many of them who don't want to be
there
and i have to
kind of trick them persuade them to be
interested in some of the things that
we're going to be studying here now it's
hard work i was not teaching graduate
students i was teaching an open
enrollment university
for people who are going to college for
the first time
so it was
just good hard honest work that kind of
kept me focused
and gave my body and my mind time to
absorb
the enormity of what came forward
but eventually
eventually
the second thing i deal with in that
chapter of coming off the mountain is
what i call the sickness of silence
and that's the isolation
of doing psychedelics in a psychedelic
phobic society
where psychedelics are illegal
where you cannot even if you can share
them in small groups you cannot share
them professionally i'm a teacher i'm a
public person
i could not share my experiences
psychedelically i literally had to
retire from my work as a philosopher of
religion before i could begin my real my
deepest work as a philosopher of
religion
that's the irony of it in fact i retired
a little early precisely to give me
enough time to write this book to to do
this work
and as i began to
to be honest publicly in the writing of
the book this boy it took me a long time
it took me before i wrote the book it
literally took me about three years
just to get myself into the
psychological position
where i was willing to let people this
deep
into this part of my life and the only
way i was able to do that
was to truly let go and and
remind myself over and over again
these experiences were not given to me
for me
they were never part of they were never
private they were never given to me for
me they were always given to me to share
to help the human community as a whole
so by let taking myself out of the
picture
and just sharing visions without owning
them in a sense or appropriating them
they were never private visions
that made it easier for me to release
them and let them
let them have their
impact
without owning that impact myself
and and there were so many experiences
which brings up
another
topic and that is
if we look across the great religious
traditions and of course other
traditions as well which haven't had
such a major impact we almost always
find
a
world view and understanding that there
is some final experience
towards which we are working
and we get that final experience and
then it's you know bliss and roses
it wasn't exactly what you found and
there aren't it seems like there was an
endless opening
for always for the possibilities that
that you open to
and there aren't
to my uh
limited knowledge there aren't a lot of
examples of that i think the best uh the
best in our own time
maybe of the teacher mead or almas is
the pen name he writes under and his two
most recent books uh
runaway realization and the alchemy of
transformation
he
he spent
decades
uh with profound study and
a kind of spiritual genius opening to
opening an enormous number of states and
then he built up this extraordinary
sophisticated psycho-spiritual map
of the progression of states and ways of
working with them
and then
recently he
stepped off his own map
and said
no there's nothing
yeah you can see a progression and
there's no final goal every opening is
merely a poor it can be
can be merely a portal to another
opening
and it
and he has a statement in there which
probably only a handful of people on the
planet could make he said
yeah i've been enlightened many times
and every time everyone someone says oh
that's the final experience but i always
find there's something more
and
that seems your experience
it is i think and i think it's
it's particularly the experience when
you use
uh i mean
this is a path of temporary immersion
and the path of temporary i mean all of
our practices are temporary but
this psychedelic path particularly is a
temporary path and that's it the
temporariness is what makes it tricky
but i like you i thought
i was doing this path in order to get to
an end state that there would be a goal
i know when i would reach it
uh it would solve all my issues or
because people describe as becoming one
with god or becoming dissolving into the
metacosmic void and
what i found was that actually i became
one with god or one with mind of the
universe many times and there are many
gradations or many levels of oneness
with god and there are even levels
of
the primal void there's levels of void
uh in the universe
eventually
there were many levels of homecoming of
of homecoming and peace and reunion and
just
relaxing into the
the bliss of return
and when the diamond luminosity opened
15 years into the work when when the
diamond luminosity opened and i entered
this
hyper hyper
clear
just
unbelievably clear
of awareness
and in the next four years i only in 26
sessions i only touched this reality
four
times lots of purification lots of
cleansing lots of
four times
the second time i touched it was the
50th session and i was as deep into the
universe as i would ever go
i was
far beyond time and space i was
dissolved completely into this ecstasy
of
the pure luminosity
and then my visual field pivoted 90
degrees and i saw a reality far in the
distance
filled with a light an even greater
light
than the diamond luminosity light
and a ray of light hit me from that
reality and it absolutely shattered me
and took me ten minutes to recover from
it
and that's when i that's when it sunk in
that it's an infinite progression
that there isn't a matter of coming to
an ending spot
you stop
you come to an ending stop when you
simply can take it no longer you can
take the ecstasy no longer you can take
the cycle of death and rebirth no longer
it's an endless progression
and that's one of the reasons i would be
gentler with myself if i were to do it
again i'd i recommend others it's not
about reaching an end state it's about
opening up
letting all this wisdom in letting the
beauty in letting the healing in going
through the purification process and
becoming a little more alive a little
more conscious
and
in the dance of life in the dance of the
universe
but it's not about reaching any end
state
and
you
you had that recognition there was
always more and
and the always more required something
of you it required a another level of
purification free for each taste of that
something more
and
you
just alluded to what you called the
diamond illumination which in some ways
i mean i hesitate to put any any
differential value on these things but
in some ways felt like
one of the most impactful of all
experiences that you had and something
which left you as i recall you said in
the book
that
that for this
you would gladly die
um
so it's k and you relate the you what
you called the diamond illumination to
the experiences described as the
culmination point in
in some other traditions
just be lovely to have you expand on on
give us a feel for this realization of
whatever extent you can of course
and for how it relates to
the
the goals of other traditions
well
as i understand it
the reality that i was taken into
in those four sessions
is a reality that's outside of the bardo
it is extra samsaric reality it's
outside of
time space and what i call the echoes of
time space bartle reality
uh
what happened
in the first two times i went into this
condition
i was taken deeper and deeper into it i
had the encounter with what i call the
absolute light which showed me that it's
an infinite progression
then the next two times i went into it
this diamond luminosity began to crunch
itself deeper and deeper into my
physical being
i wasn't going out it was coming in so
it literally was crushing itself
into my psyche into my body it felt like
it was changing me at a cellular level
and eventually at the very end of my
journey
it changed
my perception it changed my how i see
things literally physically how i can
see things not permanently it gave me a
temporary experience that i call
diamond vision i was seeing a hundred a
thousand times more sharply more clearly
than i would have ever seen before
and at that point i realized that i was
seeing
through the eyes of the future human i
was seeing in a way that all humanity
will one day see that all of our senses
cite touch taste
all of our senses are being elevated and
animated to higher and higher levels the
more consciousness we can internalize in
our body
so this crunching into me is actually
an acceleration of something which is
taking place more slowly for all of us
in our reincarnation evolutionary
reincarnation process
and
that's the message i got at the end of
my sessions was that
one of the reasons i had to stop my
sessions was
the whole movement now was no longer
going out and into the whole movement
was the
that which is out coming into me
coming in deeper deeper into me and i
literally had to stop
my sessions in order to let this process
reach its end stage reaches its natural
conclusion
when i reflect
on
the diamond luminosity condition
the peril and i draw parallels to
the spiritual traditions that i'm
familiar with
the ones that stand out of course all
the spiritual traditions speak about
light
all of the reincarnational traditions
speak about extra-samsaric reality
the clearest description i've i've come
across
are in the buddhist traditions whose
text i know the best
and their description of dharmakaya
the clear light of absolute reality the
clear light which is the
that which is the seed reality out of
which all existence emerges that which
is the love out of which all
emotion all love emerges that which is
the pure distilled power out of which
all energy
of creation emerges
in its absolute transcendent hyper clear
clear form
containing everything within it in
nucleus and yet
something which is beyond creation
itself
truly i understand why
touching that reality even once undoes
centuries of living in the shadows
of karma karmic vision is always
shadowed and it's always approximate
it's always conditioned
but to touch something which is so
profoundly unconditioned
and then slowly
the task i think is to slowly
shape one's life so that one can live
the conditioned existence
in abiding communion with that which is
unconditioned
to live
the light
in one's physical manifestation
something i am just getting started i
have so much to learn in that process
i'll never be able to
i'll never be able to conclude this
during this one lifetime
but my belief is what the universe seems
to have promised me is
that when i die
i will return to that condition
that there is nothing i need to do
between now and when i die to return to
that condition
and if i meet any obstacles along the
way if anything arises which would
prevent me from returning to that
essential truth
i have learned how to dissolve those
obstacles by taking any obstacles into
me until eventually
they dissolve of their own
of their own weight
what a wonderful vision and
and
something which clearly even as you
recount it now i could see you going
into your own experience and being
deeply deeply touched by it even now
20 30 years later
so
it's an exquisite example of the way in
which
these experiences touched and incarnated
in and as you and still have their
resonance and
and and impact and transmission i felt
palpably touched by
by the
qualities of
qualities that
that you're expressing out of your
in your description given out of your
direct experience which felt partly out
of your direct experience in this moment
and a very exquisite transmission and
you also spoke of
once more of the idea that
these awakenings the recognitions of
these
remarkable realities are not the end
point that
that there's a that's a stage but beyond
that is the
integration the bringing it
allowing it to
incarnate in and through us
and
you pointed to what you called the
diamond vision and you mentioned
that
the diamond illumination was
most resonant for you with the tibetan
buddhist tradition
and interestingly the tibetan buddhist
tradition speaks further of
of a stage beyond that which it feels
like you're illuminating of
of pure perception or recognition
in which one's perception is so
transformed by this realization that one
sees this world
not as
some merely mundane material reality but
as an expression
of that
diamond illumination
once these sacred beings one seizes
what's called a pure a pure land
optimized for awakening and expressive
of awakening
uh so they call it the pure perception
i'm not telling you anything you don't
know of course but it might be not might
be interesting for our listeners to know
that
your description not only of the
awakening to the diamond illumination
but its very effects on you
are something that is recognized and
highly valued in certain traditions
yeah
truly there is nothing
unique
in any of my journey in any it's i'm
simply rediscovering things which
many many people and many traditions
have already discovered that the
technology may be a little bit different
but
the core understanding of existence the
core truths the core insights
have been with us for a long long time
[Music]
embodied by great beings passed along
generation by generation by great beings
there's really nothing
there's nothing unique
in my work
and
you
you open to a two experiences that
others have open to and
you had your own unique constellation
and
you bring to it something which is
unique your own
gifts as a philosopher and theologian so
so once again it's the
yes and
yeah i'll tell you something that the
mother told me at the end and um when i
was really
not sure what to do with all of this and
what the mother which
for me
you know my
my naming of the absolute tends to run
in the feminine direction
uh i i see myself as a servant of the
great mother and i see all physical
existence as the embodiment of the great
mother
and the transcendent divine as more
male and the embodied divine is more
female but what the mother said was
simply let them see me as you have seen
me
that's all
just let me let them see me as you have
seen me
they'll know what to do with it
it will serve them in ways that you
cannot anticipate
just let them see me and she was very
clear she said you know
you didn't give yourself these visions
you didn't decide what visions you were
given on any particular day you were not
you had no control over
when you were broken and when you were
nourished
we did that
none of this is of your doing it was all
our doing
and you have no right to hold on to any
of it
and i think this feeling is a feeling
that spiritual beings are people who
have given themselves over to intimacy
with the universe have always felt
that
their practice is not their own and the
fruition of their practice is not their
own
and they have no right to hold on
to their fruition of their practice
because it's in the very nature of the
of the awareness
that
the divine serves all and the divine is
all and in the end it's the mother
speaking to her children it's the
mother's love for all of her children
and it's the mother's desire to wake up
all of her children which is the driving
force of it all
and i was i was struck by your
description then which echoed a theme in
the book but when you uh
when you were
portraying the communications you
received from
very profound
uh realms of consciousness and being
that you did it as
did it in the plural first person plural
we have
given you these gifts and i think it's
reminded me very much as you pointed out
the quran where
allah speaks as in as we
yeah
yeah and i don't think
i don't think it's
a plural like a polytheism
it's a plural like just vast i mean
just
unable to wrap our minds around it
so enormous
that
that it swallows our capacity to
describe or to concretize and somehow we
speaks to that
more effectively than i
again i think sometimes
no matter how profound
this are if we were to take the greatest
spiritual geniuses of our generation
and and truly just the great great
masters of our generation
and if we could go forward
500 000 years or however many thousand
years we would imagine
the great masters of that generation
will be able to see more
will have deeper experiences still
because there is a certain sense in
which the experience of any individual
is kept within in certain sense the
capacity of the herd they push the edge
but they're limited by the capacity of
the collective psyche but as
the collective psyche evolves
it extends the limit of the individual
spiritual genius
so it's it's an ongoing ever unfolding
ever progressive deepening
of this rapport
between the creative intelligence
and we who are the result of that
creative intelligence
yes
and
i'm going to
ask you to i'm going to ask a question
which is going to be of course
impossible we need another few sessions
but
but it has to be asked and that is
after all these experiences these
openings these gifts and graces
and ones which had
very dramatic impacts on your
understanding of yourself why you were
doing this the nature of reality
which exploded your
understanding in not once but many times
and that was one of the things i found
in the book and even even in our
dialogue now
recognizing my own limiting
presuppositions
such as yeah you know these chemicals
are good for psychotherapy and healing
on an individual level but no you were
forced to the recognition kicking and
screaming all the way
i would say
to a larger recognition that this was
potentially about a healing of
collective consciousness
and more and always more
so
obviously in a in a reality in which
there's always more there can be no
definitive map but
how would you describe
to the extent you can your understanding
of the
of the nature of reality how would what
how would you characterize or point us
towards
your world view at this time
i'll do my best
to answer your question
and to not weep as i do so
you go ahead and weep if you need to
it's okay
i see the universe as a magnificent as
the as
as pure genius
as saturated with genius and saturated
with
uh with the geniuses ambition
the creative impulse i see the birth of
stars and the birth of galaxies and the
birth of planets and the birth of
species and the birth of an intelligent
a self-aware species within some of the
planets and a reincarnating species
within this planet all as acts of
profound genius so just
unspeakable genius and
and
love because
it is the sharing of existence it is the
the gestating of the conditions that
make
infinite progression possible
i see
death and rebirth i see reincarnation i
see the bardo i see this vision that
when we die we don't simply wink into
this we go into a very specific
great great
gradated
series of levels of existence that
reflect our limits and our capacities i
used to think of the bardo as kind of
the op the the um
the um
[Music]
the enemy or the opposition it was a
cloud getting in the way but now i'm
being i see it as the compassionate
blanket it keeps us safe as we enter
into deeper and deeper
communion with the true power
i will call it the divine
i i don't like to call it the divine
though i use this language sometimes but
because our concepts of the divine and
of god are so childlike or so childish
compared to the reality itself
but to become to touch that power
until we are
fully formed and capable of withstanding
the intensity of that reunion it would
shatter us it would just absolutely
shatter us
we have to be very very strong and very
congealed as an individual before we can
touch that reality
and stay conscious and coherent
within the real that reality and that's
just the level of reality outside the
bardo
of this particular piece of time and
space
so
i don't know what lies beyond
the
dharmakaya i don't know what lies in the
absolute dimension but
everywhere that i have journeyed and
everywhere i have seen
there is genius arising there is
purposeful intent
uh not
not an easy to recognize purposeful
intent sometimes a very very hard
complex subtle
purposeful intent
but it's there
behind everything it's there it's always
there it's always pressing for more and
uplifting us all
and in saying what i've been saying
you know i'm just
echoing the teachings of the great
spiritual lineages of the great
teachings there's nothing original in
what i'm saying i'm simply echoing
not what i've been taught
but i'm echoing teachings that i have
seen elsewhere
that it's all alive it's all
and the depth of love
that whole's existence
is proportionate to the depth of the
genius that has orchestrated
existence that was one of the hard
things for me to take in
that the genius i could see
but the love
that's proportionate to that genius
i've become much more bhakti in this
process than i had than i had ever
thought that i would be it's just it's
just
and patient
patient
wake up now
wake up in a hundred thousand years wake
up in a million years it doesn't really
make that much difference to the creator
because it doesn't think in the short
term
she thinks in the long term
she thinks in the long term and she
doesn't think about individuals
she thinks about all of us she thinks
about the entire planet the entire
galaxy
the magnitude of
as far as i've gotten in all of this
work i've just touched the edges just
touch the edges
thank you so much chris again that was a
a true transmission of the
not only the magnitude and the genius
but of the
the
heart
like words fail heart chattering hard oh
boundlessness
of love that you saw
and what is
what is inspiring is that
is that
yes you you keep saying in in true
humility that there's nothing new in
what you saw but the fact that you did
see it
that you are reporting your own
experience that this is direct
phenomenology not some
out of some textbook but this is what
you found in your direct experience and
it echoes
the discoveries of the great
saints and sages throughout human
history and it also echoes
the findings of other deep explorers
which
which uh
stan graf put together in his book the
cosmic game where he took the deepest
insights of the thousand people he'd
worked with and welded them into a
synthesis say a cosmology an ontology a
metaphysics which was remarkably similar
to some of the findings that are great
traditions and i think was most
synchro most congruent of all with
kashmir shaivism the very profound
mysticism of
india
so
yes
from one perspective we can say yeah you
just saw what's been reported um ten
times no big deal
why'd you waste your time writing a book
on the other hand
thank you chris
this is a new way
the the fact that
we have a we have a
an integrated report of these truly
uh trans-egoic trans-personal
trans-everything
openings
from a different modality
is
very affirming
of perennial wisdom and perennial
insights
so
nothing is left out
you include the all somehow and and i
was thinking it's like this guy's
telling me about the burning bush and i
smell the smoke
you know so
beautiful and and holding on to your
humility and your
your humanity and coming back and being
a human being
you know is such a gift brother thank
you so much
indeed indeed
this there's one more theme i want to
point out
bring back or actually just point out
that's been underlying so much of what
you've you've said
you've talked about
being guided being
taken into being offered being graced by
an intelligence and love far beyond
the past of all understanding
and
what i take from that is
something that resonates deeply from my
own much more mundane explorations and
from reading
great psychologists and therapists and
other psychedelic explorers and that is
we live
usually the vast majority of humankind
lives
at war with their own
their own minds deeply distrusting of
their own psyches and themselves
and yet the deeper we go
the more we discover what you discovered
that we can trust ourselves that given
when we open open as fully as we can we
find that our minds are not these
malevolent cesspools of pain and trauma
and
and malevolence
yes there are those some of those
elements and bits we have to have to be
willing to face
but there's so much more and that
when treated well when treated well our
minds are self-healing self-actualizing
self-correcting self-transcending
yeah
and that's
that leads to this profound trust
both in ourselves
and in
the greater reality
yes absolutely you say it very well
self-correcting self-healing we all have
knots we're all born with knots we bring
in garbage from a previous lifetime lots
of previous lifetimes
but
when we bring our awareness
when we bring those knots into awareness
they open they untie themselves when we
bring our pain into awareness
it heals itself itself itself
it clarifies
and then as
as those shadows lighter it's lightness
we get clearer and clearer and relax
them
then
the genius
of our
being
shows itself
more easily more strongly and then the
wonderful discovery is
that there is no membrane ultimately
no absolute membrane between our
individual existence and the existence
of the universe itself that we just drop
right through and so
the awareness that bubbles up inside our
individual life
and the awareness which is bubbling up
around life around us in totality and in
my neighbors and in each other and in
the planet
it's the same life
it's not a separate life
so
and that's when
you know i think when we begin to really
understand existence then we can relate
to the beauty of the universe and own it
as a reflection of our beauty because
if we don't understand reincarnation and
we don't understand how life works we're
always going to be estranged from the
magnificence of a beautiful sunrise and
sunset
are the stars at night
but as we get clearer
everything begins to become
simpler
more transparent
and that's just as you say we're
self-healing
self-clarifying
self-arising
wow
chris you've given us such an incredible
gift and
i
i know that you
are very aware that this is not your
gift and that you're
you are the instrument through which
this gift has come and that's the
aspiration with which you entered this
very intense
decades-long
investigation
and yet
all because of that
this is an extraordinary transmission
you're offering
unique yes
rees perennial discoveries and yet
unique in its own form and time
and the
capacity for contextualizing within the
best of our contemporary knowledge and
understanding of the great traditions so
it's a priceless just a priceless gift
and i think
john bowed to you before i beheld you we
both
both bow and
you know and you
you let the bow go through you
gentlemen i know enough of each of your
work to know who i'm with here and i bow
to you deeply
uh because i know that all all three of
us have been working these fields for a
long time all three of us have been
nurtured by the wisdom and had been
contributing to the wisdom so i
the bowel is returned brothers truly
truly is
thank you and that's the way it is in in
the spiritual traditions say one vows
we bow to each other recognizing who who
we really are
uh chris is there anything you'd like to
say
by way of completion
first i'd like to say thank you
uh
i become more whole
i become healed and more whole when i
get to speak about these things then i
get to do what i was designed to do
and there are still
not that many places where i get to have
the conversation
that you pulled for me today that we had
together today so i want to say thank
you
and i'd like to add as a
footnote if there were one gift
that i wish i could give people
straight out of my experiences here
it would be
the gift of
letting go of the fear of death
just letting go of the fear of death if
you're afraid of death you have life
turned upside down
this is where the hard work is done this
is where we do the really hard work
death is
we have so many stupid ideas about what
happens to us when we die
death is the great liberation death is
even the partial liberation is a great
liberation death is joy death is
returned death is
to return again to the arms of the
beloved
to be born is the beginning of the hard
cycle
to die is the end of the hard cycle the
beginning of the easy part of the cycle
that's that's a wonderful flip on our
conventional understanding
chris uh
[Music]
uh well i'm just going to repeat myself
what a gift but
i want to i want to close by mentioning
again your books uh they're several dark
night early dawn
subtitle steps to a deep ecology of mind
you wrote about your teaching experience
and how to how teaching can be a
transmission in the book the living
classroom
and most recently the and
the book we've been
primarily focusing on today is the
extraordinary book lsd in the mind of
the universe
lsd and the mind of the universe and
both john and i
i don't think we can recommend it highly
enough
we've both been inspired by it chris
it's been a sheer delight to be able to
do this dialogue and these explorations
with you thank you so much for on uh our
behalf and also on behalf of all our
listeners and all the people who
who you're touching in so many ways deep
gratitude
thank you so much
thank you
this has been deep transformation
self-society spirit
talking with chris bash
[Music]
you